Add overview of Kong for Kubernetes deployment options (#2015)
Kong/docs.konghq.com: app/enterprise/1.5.x/kong-for-kubernetes/deployment-options.md

---
title: Kong for Kubernetes deployment options
---

## Deployment options

Kong for Kubernetes provides two options for its Kong Enterprise container
image:

* [kong-enterprise-k8s][k8s-bintray] (Kong for Kubernetes Enterprise)
* [kong-enterprise-edition][enterprise-bintray] (Kong for Kubernetes with Kong

>   Enterprise)

Reviewer: Please flip these around, meaning, specify the product name first and in the brackets we can write (based on image <image-name-and-link>).

  implementation isn't required for typical Kong for Kubernetes deployments, as
  they do not expose the Admin API; only the controller can access it.
  Kubernetes-level RBAC rules and namespaces should be used to restrict what
  configuration administrators can create.
* Ingress controller instances create configuration in a single workspace only
  (`default` by default). To use multiple workspaces, deploy
  multiple controller instances, setting the `CONTROLLER_KONG_WORKSPACE`
  environment variable to the workspace that instance should use. These
  instances should set `CONTROLLER_INGRESS_CLASS` to unique values for each
  instance to avoid creating duplicate configuration in workspaces. Note that
  if controller instances are deployed outside the Kong pod the Admin API must
  be exposed, and users should enable RBAC with workspace admin users for the
  controllers.  Set `CONTROLLER_KONG_ADMIN_TOKEN` to the RBAC user's token.
* The controller cannot manage configuration for the features above: it cannot
  create workspaces, Dev Portal content, admins, etc. These features must be
  configured manually through the Admin API.

### Plugin compatibility

> Not all plugins are compatible with DB-less operation. and as such not all

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Not all plugins are compatible with DB-less operation, therefore not all
```
Missed typo+slight rephrasing

---
title: Kong for Kubernetes deployment options
---

## Deployment options

Kong for Kubernetes provides two options for its Kong Enterprise container

> image:

Reviewer: The user doesn't have the necessary context here.
Before we jump into this section, we need a section to explain:

k4k8s consists of two components, a controller and a proxy. A diagram would help here.

Borrowing some content from the following pages could help:
https://github.com/Kong/kubernetes-ingress-controller/blob/master/docs/concepts/design.md
https://github.com/Kong/kubernetes-ingress-controller/blob/master/docs/concepts/deployment.md

Author: Don't recall offhand what the asset upload process is, but I think the prose explanation should suffice here: it's pretty short and simple.

* [kong-enterprise-k8s][k8s-bintray] ([Kong for Kubernetes Enterprise][k4k8s-enterprise-install])
* [kong-enterprise-edition][enterprise-bintray] ([Kong for Kubernetes with Kong

>   Enterprise][k4k8s-with-enterprise-install])

Reviewer: Please flip these around, meaning, specify the product name first and in the brackets we can write (based on image).

supported plugins][supported-plugins] to see if you require a plugin that needs
a database.

Third-party plugins are generally compatible with DB-less as long as they do
not create custom entities (i.e. they do not add new entities that users can
create and modify through the Admin API).

### Manual configuration

DB-less configuration must be supplied as a complete unit: it is not possible
to add or modify entities individually through the Admin API, or provide
partial configuration that is added to existing configuration. As such, all
configuration must be sourced from Kubernetes resources so that the ingress
controller can render it into a complete configuration.

On database-backed deployments, users can create or modify configuration
through the Admin API. The ingress controller uses a tag (set by the
`CONTROLLER_KONG_ADMIN_FILTER_TAG` environment variable) to to identify
configuration that it manages. While the controller will revert changes to
configuration with its tag, other configuration is left as-is.

Although database-backed deployments can use controller-generated and
manually-added configuration simultaneously, Kong's recommended best practice

> is to manage as much configuration through Kubernetes resources as possible.

Reviewer: With the exception of consumers. 

Can we explain how some use-cases require consumers to be dynamically created and consumers can exist with a large cardinality, and in that case one should use Admin API instead of k8s CRDs?

---
title: Kong for Kubernetes deployment options
---

- [Deployment options](#deployment-options)
- [DB-less versus database-backed deployments](#db-less-versus-database-backed-deployments)
- [Choosing between DB-less or database-backed deployments](#choosing-between-db-less-or-database-backed-deployments)
  * [Feature availability](#feature-availability)
  * [Plugin compatibility](#plugin-compatibility)
  * [Manual configuration](#manual-configuration)

> - [Migrating between deployment types](#migrating-between-deployment-types)

Reviewer 2: You don't need this section, the docs now have a page ToC on the right-hand side. (I need to update the doc template though, thanks for the reminder)

> # Deployment options

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Deployment options
```

Kong for Kubernetes provides two options for its Kong Enterprise container
image:

* [kong-enterprise-k8s][k8s-bintray] (Kong for Kubernetes Enterprise)
* [kong-enterprise-edition][enterprise-bintray] (Kong for Kubernetes with Kong
  Enterprise)

_These repositories require a login. If you see a 404, log in through the [Kong
repository home page](https://bintray.com/kong) first._

The `kong-enterprise-k8s` image is recommended for most deployments. It
provides most Kong Enterprise plugins and runs without a database, but does not
provide other Kong Enterprise features (Kong Manager, Dev Portal, Vitals,
etc.).

The `kong-enterprise-edition` image is recommended for deployments that require
features not supported by `kong-enterprise-k8s`. It supports all Kong
Enterprise plugins and features, but cannot run without a database.

> # DB-less versus database-backed deployments

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## DB-less versus database-backed deployments
```

When using Kong for Kubernetes, the source of truth for Kong's configuration is
the Kubernetes configuration in etcd: Kong's custom Kubernetes resources,
ingresses, and services provide the information necessary for the ingress
controller to configure Kong. This differs from Kong deployments that do not
use an ingress controller, where configuration in the database or DB-less
config file is the source of truth.

In traditional deployments, Kong's database (PostgreSQL or Cassandra) provides
a persistent store of configuration available to all Kong nodes to ensure
consistent proxy behavior across the cluster that is not affected by node
restarts. Because etcd provides this functionality in Kong for Kubernetes
deployments, it is not necessary to run an additional database, reducing
maintenance and infrastructure requirements.

While Kong for Kubernetes does not require a database, it is fully compatible
with PostgreSQL and requires it for some features. etcd remains the source of

> truth, but controller can translate Kubernetes resources there into either

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
truth, but the controller can translate Kubernetes resources from etcd into either
```

> DB-less or database configuration.

Reviewer: Can we skip DB-less here? This cause confusion and I had to read this section 3 times to figure out what we are talking about.
The previous paragraph has enough explanation for DB-less and we should focus on database-mode in this one. 
We should explain here that in this case, the controller will configure Kong's database to match what is stored inside etcd.

> # Choosing between DB-less or database-backed deployments

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Choosing between DB-less or database-backed deployments
```

In general, DB-less deployments are simpler to maintain and require less
resources to run, and as such are the preferred option for Kong for Kubernetes.
These deployments use the `kong-enterprise-k8s` image and must set
`KONG_DATABASE=off` in their environment variables.

Database-backed deployments offer a wider range of features using the
`kong-enterprise-edition` image. Review the sections below to determine if your
use case requires a feature that is not available in DB-less deployments.

> ## Feature availability

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Feature availability
```

> Some Kong Enterprise features are not available in DB-less deployments. Users

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some Kong Enterprise features are not available in DB-less deployments.
```

> should use the `kong-enterprise-edition` image and a database-backed deployment

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the `kong-enterprise-edition` image and a database-backed deployment
```

> if they wish to use:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
if you want to use:
```

* Kong Manager
* Dev Portal
* Brain
* Immunity
* Teams (RBAC)
* Vitals
* Workspaces

Because Kong for Kubernetes is configured by the ingress controller, some
functionality in these features is different from traditional deployments:

* Users will not typically create proxy configuration through Kong Manager;
  proxy configuration is normally managed by the controller and users provide

>   configuration via Kubernetes resources.

Reviewer 2: For this bullet, simplifying/directing it to the reader:

Instead of using Kong Manager, proxy configuration is normally managed by the controller, and you would provide configuration via Kubernetes resources.

* Because the controller creates proxy configuration on behalf of users, users
  do not need to interact with the Admin API directly. Typical Kong for
  Kubernetes deployments do not expose the Admin API to protect it in lieu of
  RBAC: only the controller can access it. Kubernetes-level RBAC rules and
  namespaces should be used to restrict what configuration administrators can

>   create.

Reviewer 2: Since this point touches on RBAC twice, wanted to make the distinction of Kong's implementation vs Kubernetes:

Because the controller creates proxy configuration on behalf of users, you do not need to interact with the Admin API directly. Kong's own RBAC implementation isn't required for typical Kong for Kubernetes deployments, as they do not expose the Admin API; only the controller can access it. Kubernetes-level RBAC rules and namespaces should be used to restrict what configuration administrators can create.

* Ingress controller instances create configuration in a single workspace only

>   (`default` by default). To use multiple workspaces, users should deploy

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  (`default` by default). To use multiple workspaces, deploy
```

  multiple controller instances, setting the `CONTROLLER_KONG_WORKSPACE`
  environment variable to the workspace that instance should use. These
  instances should set `CONTROLLER_INGRESS_CLASS` to unique values, to avoid

>   creating duplicate configuration in workspaces. Note that if controller

Reviewer 2: Set `CONTROLLER_INGRESS_CLASS` to unique values for each instance to avoid creating duplicate configuration in workspaces.

  instances are deployed outside the Kong pod the Admin API must be exposed,
  and users should enable RBAC with workspace admin users for the controllers.

>   Set `CONTROLLER_KONG_ADMIN_TOKEN` to the RBAC user's token.

Reviewer 2: This entire bullet on how to set up instances as workspaces should really be a separate section with steps, though I'm not sure that a section like that would belong in this topic. Maybe shorten this bullet to something like:

Ingress controller instances create configuration in a single workspace only (`default` by default). To use multiple workspaces, deploy multiple controller instances. See [the section on doing this thing] for more detail.

Reviewer: +1 for dedicated sections

Author: We don't currently have a good way of doing this or instructions for it--the only option is to cut out the controller section of one of our stock manifests, wrap it in its own deployment, and deploy it independently, which we don't really want users to do (it's tedious and leaves a lot of room for error).

We do plan to [add a one-step setting in the chart](https://trello.com/c/ClRh4pvm/389-support-controller-only-releases) to disable the non-controller components of the deployment, and should probably create a static manifest for a controller-only deployment also. Would it make sense to leave this as-is for now, write the new doc along with those manifest changes, and link it once done?

* The controller cannot manage configuration for the features above: it cannot
  create workspaces, Dev Portal content, admins, etc. These features must be
  configured manually through the Admin API.

### Plugin compatibility

> 

Reviewer: Let's point to the new document here to avoid duplication.

Reviewer: https://github.com/Kong/kubernetes-ingress-controller/blob/master/docs/references/plugin-compatibility.md

> ## Plugin compatibility

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Plugin compatibility
```

Not all plugins are compatible with DB-less operation, and as such not all
plugins are available in the `kong-enterprise-k8s` image. In addition to the
[compatible core plugins][core-plugins], the `kong-enterprise-k8s` image
includes the following Enterprise plugins:

* canary release
* collector
* degraphql
* forward-proxy
* graphql-proxy-cache-advanced
* graphql-rate-limiting-advanced
* jwt-signer
* kafka-log
* kafka-upstream
* ldap-auth-advanced
* mtls-auth
* oauth2-introspection
* openid-connect
* proxy-cache-advanced
* rate-limiting-advanced
* request-validator
* response-transformer-advanced

> * vault-auth

Reviewer 2: Not in scope for this PR, but something to look into: for all of the plugins in this list, is it safe to add a section in the docs on db-less config as mentioned in this ticket: https://konghq.atlassian.net/browse/FTI-1462

Author: Strictly speaking yes, though with the caveat that any plugin can use that format--as I understand it the main ask there is to provide the YAML version for decK rather than DB-less.

The following Enterprise plugins are not included:

* application-registration (only used with Dev Portal)
* exit-transformer
* key-auth-enc
* request-transformer-advanced (request-transformer now has the same feature
  set)
* route-transformer-advanced
* statsd-advanced (only used with Vitals)

Third-party plugins are generally compatible with DB-less as long as they do
not create custom entities (i.e. they do not add new entities that users can
create and modify through the Admin API).

> ## Manual configuration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Manual configuration
```

DB-less configuration must be supplied as a complete unit: it is not possible
to add or modify entities individually through the Admin API, or provide
partial configuration that is added to existing configuration. As such, all
configuration must be sourced from Kubernetes resources so that the ingress
controller can render it into a complete configuration.

On database-backed deployments, users can create or modify configuration
through the Admin API. The ingress controller uses a tag (set by the
`CONTROLLER_KONG_ADMIN_FILTER_TAG` environment variable) to to identify
configuration that it manages. While the controller will revert changes to
configuration with its tag, other configuration is left as-is.

Although database-backed deployments can use controller-generated and
manually-added configuration simultaneously, Kong's recommended best practice
is to still manage as much configuration through Kubernetes resources as

> possible, primarily using manual configuration for temporary or test resources.

Reviewer: Let's explain first why controller-generated is the way to go, what problems can happen if you also do manually added configuration, and then let's explain how you can do manual configuration in a way that avoids conflicts.

This probably requires rewording this and the two paragraphs before it.

Author: Reworded last and added conflict avoidance strategies (though I'm somewhat averse to this since it tacitly implies that it's fine to mix the two), but left the order the same. I think it's important to establish the groundwork of what the controller is doing to understand how they coexist.

> ## Migrating between deployment types

Reviewer: Thank you!! This is much needed and a great section.

> # Migrating between deployment types

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Migrating between deployment types
```
